okay good morning everyone you made it
it's the end of the
beginning hopefully all of you finished
assignment
10 yes no awesome okay I'll take that as
a yes everyone finished all five
differentiable
assignments grad students almost not
quite okay you got one more day to work
on that almost there okay as you were
coding up the evolutionary algorithms
and maybe refactoring the quadrip and
possibly struggling with gradients in
the fifth and final differentiable
assignment it occurred to you to ask
what would happen if we mutated two
synaptic weights rather than one what
would happen if the motors were a little
bit stronger a little bit weaker what
would happen if my quadruped had two
extra legs and was a hexapod rather than
a quadruped we been evolving the robot
to walk what would happen if we evolv
the robot to jump or climb up stairs or
navigate over a rough terrain what would
happen if what would happen if what
would happen if you now have one month
to try and figure it out so hopefully uh
by the end of assignment 10 you now have
a relatively stable code base on which
you can conduct some evolutionary
robotics
experiments with the fifth and final
differentiable assignment hopefully you
have a relatively firm foundation in
which to try and optimize the body Andor
brains of robots in a
nonrandom way so what we're going to do
today probably we're going to take most
of this morning is to actually walk
through what the expectations are for
the final project and I will try to give
you a good sense of what works and what
doesn't work for a final project but
that's only advice the final project is
in your hands so obviously you got a lot
of room to maneuver you can come up with
an idea of your own but we want to make
sure you come up with an idea that's
doable um in a month's time I understand
that some of you have some other things
going on in other classes as well yeah I
realize it's a busy time of year it's a
tricky time of year to summon enough
focus and willpower to come up with a
scientific question and try and test it
with your code base but we'll do the
best we can okay so I'm going to go over
a lot of material today I'm sure there
will be more questions that arise about
the final project uh over the uh final
month of the course so I will set aside
a few minutes at the beginning of every
class from now until the end of the
semester to field questions about final
projects to clarify anything anything as
we go any questions so far so far so
good okay so you will see that on today
now you are being assigned the very
first of your weekly report reps so
you're no longer submitting screenshots
and videos demonstrating that you've uh
completed assignments you are going to
continue to submit on bright space
screenshots and videos demonstrating
that you're making progress towards your
final project that's the weekly report
so all of you now whether you're taking
this class for undergraduate or graduate
credit at
11:59 p.m. next Monday
uh eclipse or no Eclipse you're going to
be submitting a demonstration to us
you're going to show us that you've made
some progress towards your final project
and we'll talk about what these weekly
Reports look like in a moment okay so if
you click on through to uh the first
weekly report it will take you to Bright
space and you will find as always
something that is due next Monday at
11:59 p.m. exactly what is due is
describ in this Google doc here which if
you click on it will bring you to the
evolutionary robotics final project
instruction this document is almost two
pages long my apologies we're going to
read through it from top to bottom this
morning just so we're all literally and
metaphorically on the same page okay all
right so um undergraduate students
you've got three options for your final
project there is a list of preformulated
ated projects these are ideas that uh
some former students and I came up with
that are reasonable they're things that
are doable in about a month's time
assuming you were relatively successful
implementing all 10 assignments we've
broken as you'll see if you click
through to this list you'll see that
some of these projects have an easy
label attached to them and some of them
have a hard label attached to them for
obvious reasons some are easier than
others you can pick one of those from
the list or you can Define uh devise a
final project of your own read through
that list and it'll give you sort of a
sense of what's possible and you should
be able to come up with an idea of your
own okay for those taking the course for
graduate credit you do need to come up
with an idea of your own okay if you
choose your own idea it must involve
modifying the code base somehow either
the code base from assignments 1 through
10 or the code base from the
differentiable assign m ments one
through five for the those taking it for
grad credit we don't mind you can modify
A10 or D5 to suit your final project
idea fine with us okay uh I I'd prefer
that rather than you coding up something
from scratch it's much easier to go Ary
If you're sort of starting over from
scratch I don't advise trying to create
your own physics engine and then do
something interesting with it in a
month's time so your own idea but using
the codebase that you currently have
okay final project ideas using the
differentiable assignment codebase are
here I forgot to put a link to here
those taking this for graduate credit if
you go back to the diff design wiki page
at the bottom now there's a list of some
final project ideas things you can do
with the differentiable simulator okay
I'll put the link back here later okay
all right there are four Mondays
remaining in the semester you're going
to use this time to Divi devise an
Implement in four increments four weekly
increments your final project okay how
do you decide on whether you want to do
an easy or hard project if you found you
were struggling with the programming
assignments I recommend the easy an easy
project if you want to try something
more challenging go with the hard one
you will not be penalized if you choose
the easy uh project okay uh if you want
to try an idea of your own please email
frya or myself so we can basically just
sign off or give you some suggestions
about how how to either reel it back in
if we feel it's a little bit too
ambitious if it sounds like something
that could be done in about a week or
two weeks time will suggest maybe some
ways to elaborate or enrich your final
project idea
okay what you need to do between now uh
and Monday is think of a final project
and then think how to break it down into
four bite-size chunks or at least weekly
chunks for each of those four uh
increments you also need to think about
how you're going to demonstrate it to us
with a couple of screenshots or a video
as always we're not going to have a look
at any code you got to try and make
things easy on us where we can
relatively easily see in your screenshot
or a video that you're making progress
on your final project okay so what
you're going to do in the next week is
write out those four milestones and they
all have to be about a sentence or two
no paragraphs no essays keep it keep it
short and simple write out these
milestones and a sentence or even half a
sentence on what your planned
visualizations are to demonstrate that
you've completed that Milestone so
here's an example okay if you click
through to the link above you're going
to see a long list of projects one of
those projects is the Up Up and Away
project which is to modify your codebase
so that instead of evolving for forward
Locomotion you're evolving for jumping
jumping sounds like a trivial thing has
anybody tried to evolve jumping yet in
their
robot I can guarantee you it's not a
trivial thing to do okay so um this is
me writing as if I was the student if
you copy if you write something along
these lines and drop it into Milestone
one by next Monday night that's that's
good so I would like to implement the up
up an away project where I'm going to
evolve my robot to jump in order to
evolve it to jump I'm going to modify
simulate. py so that when the simulation
of each robot ends simulate. py is going
to write out not a single floating Point
number which is how far forward the rep
robot traveled but instead the file is
going to write out all of the touch
sensor values for the four feet of my
robot in a binary Matrix so we're going
to have a whole bunch of col colums in
this Matrix which correspond to each
time step of the
simulation each of the four rows in this
binary Matrix are going to correspond to
the four feet in my robot I haven't put
those details into my description that's
kind of too much detail for frya and I
but this is sort of how you want to be
thinking over the next week okay I'm
going to write out all of these numbers
they're all plus ones and minus ones
whether or not that foot is in contact
with the ground for each time step of
the simulation and I'm going to write
that I'm going to have simulate. py
write that out to a file when it ends
rather than what it currently does which
is to write out the distance traveled by
the robot so far so good
okay uh there we go okay sorry I should
have said I
will include a screenshot of
simulate.
py writing out this Matrix so perhaps in
this first week you might not even have
a simulation going yet but you're you're
going to demonstrate your code doing
something like for example writing out a
matrix to a file you can just record
your screen make a sure a screenshot or
a short video of simulate. py ending you
double click on a file that file opens
and we see a whole bunch of ones and
zeros right 10-second video or a couple
of screenshots shows us that your code
is doing what you wanted it to do
by the end of this first
week show don't
tell any questions about that seem
reasonable
okay second milestone what am I going to
do in the second week okay so now
simulate. py is writing out this Matrix
now I'm going to switch from simulate.
py Back to the search process The
evolutionary algorithm so in the second
week I'm going to modify search. py so
that it reads in this binary Matrix
when simulate. pyns and it's going to
boil down that Matrix to a single
floating Point number we're going to
apply our fitness function to this
Matrix and the fitness function is going
to spit out a floating Point number okay
what seems reasonable I want this robot
to jump so if a robot or a human is
jumping their SP their feet are in
contact with the ground for as little
time as possible so I'm going to compute
in search. py Fitness function which
just counts the number of minus ones in
the
Matrix if you modified your parallel
hill climber that's in search. py to
evolve that what are you going to get do
you
think if you evolve with that Fitness
function for the quadraped what is the
evolved quadruped likely going to be
doing at the end of search.
py try to get as many things off the
ground as possible okay so probably
going to get
jumping balancing on two legs balancing
on two legs or tap dancing even with
something simple like jump. p uh jumping
you're unlikely to get what you want you
may not know that in advance but this is
what I want you to try and think about
over the next week you're all becoming
experts on running evolutionary robotics
experiments we're seeing a whole bunch
of them up here at the front and what
works and what doesn't work you can
almost run this idea in your head right
you imagine running the parallel hill
climber and it's evolving controllers
for the quadruped and the quadruped is
evolving to generate more and more minus
ones thanks to the fitness function does
that always mean jumping what would be
some some easier ways for it to do that
you may or may not be right in your
predictions but I want you to try and
come up with a plan and if you don't get
if you think there's a there's a a
chance of perverse instantiation you're
not going to get what you want what are
you going to do in the third week to try
and guard against it or or improve or
help with whatever it is you want your
robot to do so uh this hypothetical
student here is thinking this through
and says this will lead to the evolution
of robots that keep as many feet off the
ground as possible which is not
necessarily jumping and I'm going to
show that to you all with a video so
that's the plan for for the second week
plan for the second week is I'm going to
modify the fitness function to compute
the number of consecutive time steps in
which the robot keeps all of its feet
off the ground right so clearly this
student has thought a little bit about
what might go wrong and has come up with
a different Fitness function they're
going to try out in week three that more
explicitly asks for exactly what you
want which is not just to keep feet off
the ground but to keep all the feet off
the ground for as many time steps as
possible okay um I'm going to implement
that I'm going to rerun my code and then
I will demonstrate with a video that
this causes the robot to jump and stay
in the air as long as possible so this
this hypothetical student who wants to
evolve a robot to jump has sort of
sketched out what they plan to do over
the next 3 weeks that they hope will
lead at the end of the third week to
what they want what are you going to do
with your fourth week in your fourth
week you're going to be doing what's
called AB testing and we'll talk a
little bit about AB testing first before
we talk about this fourth deliverable
anybody heard of AB testing
before anybody ever visited a website
and then come back a week later and it
looks a little bit different the fonts a
little bit different the color a little
bit different that's whoever makes the
website subjecting you to AB
testing you create a website uh you
create two slightly different versions
of the website with slightly different
fonts and when any person arrives at
your website you flip a coin heads they
see version a of your website Tails they
see version B of your website next user
comes flip another coin
ABAB and this company over a week's time
starts to collect a whole bunch of web
traffic data about people landing on
version a or version B of their site and
doing whatever they want to do and at
the end of the week the user interface
members of the company have to decide
are they going to move forward with just
version a or version B of the website
how do they decide they've got all this
Raw web traffic data version a version B
of their website what's the
test if you're the company what are you
hoping for they'll call you or buy your
product how many people actually click
through to buy your product how much
time did people spend on the site if
you're able to detect whether the user
that landed on your website was a bot or
a human
maybe a gets rid of bots quicker than
version B does there's lots of different
metrics you could come up with where you
apply that metric to the web data you
have for version a and version B and
you're looking to see whether that
metric is different between A and B if
more people buy products when they land
on B rather than a throw away a and and
version B becomes your website
this is very standard practice in
engineering software engineering web
design and it turns out robotics as well
so at the end of week three this
hypothetical student is hopeful that
they now have an evolutionary system in
which they can evolve jumping but
they're now going to come up with
variant a or version a of their codebase
and version B of their code base in this
fourth week and evolve robots slightly
differently in these two versions of
their code and they want to see which
one works better which one actually
leads to better jumping in this case so
this student proposes to us here's how
they're going to start to do ab
testing I'm going to modify my the
simulation side of my code again to
write out not just the touch sensor data
like I've been doing over the last three
weeks but I'm also going to go back to
writing out the horizontal distance that
the robot travels which is what
simulate. py currently does the end of
assignment 10 okay so now at the end of
every simulation they have distance
traveled by the robot and this binary
touch sensor uh data set they're going
to compute Fitness now as D * T inside
of search. py they're they're proposing
to modify their Fitness function yet
again where D is the
horizontal distance traveled by the
robot and the the consecutive number of
time
steps consecutive number of time steps
that all feet are off the ground so if
you did evolve the quadraped with this
Fitness function what kind of behavior
do you think you're going to get you're
trying to maximize D distance traveled
and maximize T the number number of
consecutive time steps with all feet off
the
ground what are we evolving
for long jumping long jumping right you
remember the Olympics theme song where I
showed you some of the final projects
from last year so now they can start to
change the fitness function to select
for different kinds of jumping so now
they're going to evolve for long
jumping and they're going to then
compare evolving for the standing jump
which is what they did in the third
Milestone they were just evolving at the
end of the third week for number of time
steps off the
ground and they that's their version a
and version B is they can evolve for
long jumping so a evolve for high
jumping B evolve for long jumping and
which of these two versions A or B
produces better
jumping to say because a standing jump
and a long jump are just different kind
of
jumps for this student they want to just
see which of these two versions A or B
causes the robot to jump as high as
possible there nothing that necessarily
says the standing jump or the long jump
will produce a higher y component a more
positive or negative y component they
want to compare these two versions
of their
code seems like kind of an arbitrary
choice but that's okay in the final
project yeah you're trying out two
different ways of doing things yeah
another another way they might have gone
so uh third Milestone I'm going to
evolve I'm going to evolve a standing
jump and in the fourth Milestone I'm
going to evolve standing jump with a low
mutation rate every child uh suffers a
change to one synaptic weight that's
version a which is what you already have
version B I'm going to increase the
mutation rate whenever a child is
produced I'm going to allow one two or
three synapses to suffer a random change
maybe it's easier to evolve jumping if
more things can change between parent
child parent child parent child then
less things you can make Arguments for
or against a higher mutation rate it's
not clear so for that student that
becomes a or b
any questions so
far this is obviously a hypothetical
example but just to give you a sense of
what we're looking for okay so what we
want you to submit by next Monday night
is exactly is exactly this a write up of
these four things which is your plan for
the next
month and we want you to
include your evidence that you've done
the first part seem
reasonable okay an obvious question that
might be occurring to you is what
happens if your plan changes right what
happens if at the end of week two you
actually do get jumping exactly as you
want it right good for you you're done
two weeks early afraid not change your
plan when you submit when you submit
your second milestone leave a note to us
here was my original plan for week three
and week four but I managed to
accomplish my goal early so now I'm
going to try some other things right or
I didn't accomplish my goal things
turned out to be even harder than I
thought so here's my revised plan for
week three and week four it's okay with
us if you change your baby steps your
four baby steps that you're taking
towards your final project it's also
okay as you go from week to week maybe
your ideas change about what you want to
do as long as you tell us this was my
plan last week this is my new plan and
I've got a new plan I know what I'm
doing over the next two weeks long as
you do that no problem yeah
okay okay so again by next Monday night
uh by next Monday night you're going to
be telling us what you're going to do
your four milestones and a link to some
proof that you actually implemented it
there's one other thing you need to do
you need to do a little bit of house
housekeeping there's a couple of minor
things that need to be fixed in your
code base these are things that are
going to cause you a bit of a headache
if you don't fix them before you start
modifying your code base for the final
project shouldn't take you long you
don't even need to show us any evidence
that you did it I just recommend that
you fix these few things okay following
Monday the 15th you complete your second
milestone uh you complete your your
second milestone and tell us your four
Milestones again so here's what I did
last week here's what I did this week
here's my modified plan for week three
week four and proof of Milestone 2 same
thing for the Monday after that proof of
Milestone 3 and uh and in the last week
uh of classes you're going to be showing
us preliminary results from your AB
testing here's a video of my high jump
here's a video of my robot doing the
long jump and as you can see just by I
by looking at these two videos the robot
that did the long jump actually got
higher than the one that did the
standing jump that's preliminary results
of your ab test we get what your A and B
is and you're pointing to us something
in a short video or a couple of
screenshots we can see the thing that
you're comparing between your two
variations any questions about that
okay all right uh sorry that's not the
that's not the last week that's the
penultimate week of the semester the
last week of the semester you're going
to be submitting materials uh m a
written report and an oral presentation
this is a short YouTube video that
you'll be presenting during the exam
period which is the following day
Tuesday May the 7th so what you're going
to be submitting uh the night of May 6th
and what we're going to be doing in
class here on the morning of Tuesday May
7th we'll talk about later we're not
quite there yet I want you to just focus
on these four milestones for the next
month or
so all good okay all right the thing you
probably really want to know your final
project if you may recall is worth
30% I broken this into 16% for your four
weekly milestones and 14% for what
you're submitt the final Monday night
and what you're doing in class Tuesday
morning during the exam period 16% for
the four weekly Milestones so 4% each
more or less like the 10
assignments all
good okay ah I guess that's it okay so
what I would suggest you do is when you
get some time go and have a look at this
list I might go through this list next
time we meet in class and uh can point
out a few things about some of those
easy and hard projects all good
okay all right good luck with ideation
this
week all right back to lecture material
we're talking about open problems in the
field things for which no one has a good
answer for yet maybe some of you might
come up with a good answer we're working
our way through trying to cross the
reality Gap arguably
the hardest and the least Wells solved
problem in robotics in general AI
designs a robot in simulation and we try
and realize it in the real world and it
doesn't work we fail to cross the
reality Gap first idea sprinkle some
noise in the simulation that tends to
help second idea connect a physics
engine to a 3D printer and just print as
many evolved robots as you can with the
hope that at least one of them crosses
the Gap and we started last time by
talking about my own humble attempt to
try and solve this problem the idea
behind the resilient machines project is
don't just evolve robots in a in a
physics
engine evolve the physics engine also to
more closely match the reality of
wherever your evolved robot is going to
end up so as we'll see in a moment when
we return to the resilient machines
project the resilient machines is not
just about Sim toore evolving in
simulation and transferring to reality
there is also real to sim we have a
physical robot that's moving around in
its environment it's collecting Intel
it's collecting data about what works
and what doesn't work in reality and
it's sending that data back and that raw
material is being used to
evolve simulators or physics engines to
more closely match the physical robot
and its surroundings that's the basic
intuition behind the resilient machines
project
okay okay so I think we got to here last
time forget about the EA this was this
clunky name we'll call it the resilient
machines project from here on out in the
resilient machines project unlike
anything you've seen in this class so
far there is not just one evolutionary
algorithm at work there are one one two
three evolutionary algorithms at work
the first evolutionary algorithm is
going to be evolving populations of
simulators we talked about what would be
an obvious Fitness function or Fitness
what would be the fitness of Any Given
simulator in that population what makes
for a better or worse
simulator
what makes for a bad simulator low
Fitness absolutely the fitness function
as you'll see in a moment is going to
measure how well the simulator matches
reality so we've got one evolutionary
algorithm that's evolving populations of
simulators we have a let me skip to the
third one for a moment come back to the
second one the third one should look
very familiar to you
this is an evolutionary algorithm that's
evolving a useful controller for a robot
in a
simulator but it's not an off-the-shelf
simulator it's evolving uh robot
controllers in the evolved
Simulator the evolved simulator singular
not
plural we have a whole population of
simulators here which one do we choose
from this population of evolving
simulators in which to evolve simulated
robots for those robots to do whatever
we want them to do as we usually
do you've got a whole choice you got a
whole population of evolved
simulators one the highest Fitness the
one with highest Fitness let's be
optimists and assume that the one that
has highest F Fitness is the most
accurate reflection of reality so that's
the one we should use for evolving robot
controllers so far so good two
evolutionary algorithms one evolving
simulators the other evolving virtual
robots in a simulator the best one from
this
population question what what vares
between simulators yeah we haven't said
that yet I'm trying to give you a 10,000
foot view of how this works we're going
to dive down into each of these three
evolutionary algorithms in a
moment okay the third one this is a
little
trickier uh we're going to use a third
evolutionary algorithm that's going to
evolve controllers for the robot so that
when the physical robot uses one of the
controllers from this third evolutionary
algorithm that physical robot is going
to liberate or discover new information
about the world it's going to act in a
way in reality that provides new raw
material for this
one this is a little trickier so we I
mention here
curiosity if you're learning an
instrument or you're learning a sport or
you're learning a new branch of
mathematics once you start to get a
little bit of the basics down you might
try some stuff out what would happen if
yeah get some new information from the
world okay we'll come back to this third
evolutionary algorithm towards the end
of this lecture but I want you to focus
on these two for a moment the shorthand
for the first evolutionary algorithm is
the estimator it's the thing that's
trying to estimate reality that's what a
that's what a physics engine does it
doesn't reflect reality as you all now
probably know full well it estimates
it's not perfect right the second
evolutionary algorithm I'll refer to as
the exploiter it's going to try and
exploit one of these evolved simulators
to get the behavior that we want for our
robot right we're trying to exploit this
evolved simulator to do some useful work
which is to evolve a robot that does
useful work for us in reality the third
one we're going to call exploration
because when this evolutionary algorithm
gives a controller to the physical Rob
robot the physical robot is going to do
something new in the world to explore
its world and get some new information
back for the
simulators everybody get this so far all
right okay so here we go we're going to
walk through the next 12 slides or so a
one run of the resilient machines
project you're going to see how these
three evolutionary algorithms uh fit
together so we're going to start with a
physical robot we already have our
physical robot it's this one and you'll
see a video of it uh in a
moment we don't know how to control it
NASA wants to send this to an
extraplanetary body and have it move
across the surface of that
extraplanetary body it's not quite clear
how it should should move it's even more
not clear how it should move if
something unexpected happens to this
machine yeah okay so we have this
physical robot we're going to start by
giving this physical robot a little bit
of information which is we're going to
tell it that at least at the beginning
to the best of our knowledge you are
made up of 1 2 3 4 5 6 7even 8 nine
Parts this physical robot uh does not
have a camera on board it cannot see its
own body it doesn't know we're just
giving a a little bit of
information this robot has no idea how
all these parts are put together this
robot or really The evolutionary
algorithm is going to discover how all
these nine pieces are fit together it's
going to
construct this evolutionary algorithm is
going to estimate or construct or
discover how all these parts are put
together here we go okay so at the very
beginning of this project the robot the
physical robot doesn't know how to move
it knows it's got nine parts doesn't
know how they fit together has
absolutely no information where should
it
start best thing to do is probably to
start in real the robot's going to do
something to generate a little bit of
data in the real world and we're going
to feed that small bit of real data back
in to start evolving the simulators to
explain that small bit of information
from The Real
World if you're this robot or you're a
baby you don't know much about your own
body you don't know how it works what
would you
do it's not a rhetorical question what
do you probably did do this way back at
the beginning you just don't
remember move around just move around
just do something at random okay which
is exactly what this robot
does does this robot look familiar
radially symmetric quadraped yeah Okay
so we've got these nine Parts as you can
see it's got these four legs r Al
arranged around its body each leg has a
shoulder and a knee the shoulder and the
knee each have one degree of Freedom so
the robot knows it's got nine parts and
it knows it has eight
Motors at this point the robot has
randomly chosen
to rotate Motors one and five sorry one
and five one and five down and rotate
all the others up
ah why can I not run this
now we had
it okay as I mentioned this robot has no
camera on board so it can't see what its
body looks like and it can't see how its
body moves this robot has only two
sensors on board it's got two vestibular
sensors you also o have two vestibular
sensors where are
they right so this robot has two
vestibular sensors in its main body
here and these two vestibular sensors
tell it how it can move how much it's
rotating left and right how much the
main body is tilting left and right and
how much the main body is tilting
forward and back so at the end of this
what is this
5c uh experim in the real world the
robot has run some random controller and
it's gotten back at the end of these 5
Seconds two floating Point numbers how
much it's tilted left or right and how
much it's tilted forward or
back okay I want you to try and put
yourself in the shoes of this robot I
lock you in a big metal box and in front
of you inside that metal box are eight
levers where you can pull some of those
levers you pull lever one and lever five
and suddenly you feel yourself tilt to
the right what do you conclude you're
sitting inside a machine what can you
conclude about that machine you've
pulled motor one and five down and
you've tilted to the right what does
that mean what does that tell
you doesn't tell you much tells you a
little bit of
information any ideas
the left side of my body is moving up
and I'm tilting to the right so if I
pulled Motors one and five down and the
left side of my body went up then where
must Motors one and five
be I pulled Motors one and five
down they're on my left side somewhere
yeah so we've got a little bit of
sensory motor information from The Real
World
the motor information is one and five
down and the resulting sensory
information is I tilt 30 to the right
everybody see that that's the kind of
sensory motor information this robot is
able to get from The Real World okay
it's not a lot of information so this
robot could start pulling other leevers
and doing all sorts of things but
remember we're doing this project for
NASA and this makes NASA very very
nervous this robot has high uncertainty
not even not just about even where it is
but how it's even put together it knows
very little if you know very little or
you're uncertain stay still do nothing
try a few things and then see if you can
make sense of that little bit of
information that you get maybe the robot
s sitting on the lip of a massive crater
and one more pull of the lever and
that's it for 10 billion taxpayer
dollars yeah very very gentle and slow
so now we've just visited real we're
going to do real to
sim this robot is going to stop moving
and it's going to communicate by
Bluetooth with an offboard computer and
it's going to send that information and
we're going to start up the first of the
three evolutionary algorithms which is
going to start to evolve
simulators which for the moment is the
simulated
robot I mentioned earlier that we're
evolving the physics engine as a whole
that's a bit of an approximation
ultimately that's what this project does
but for our purposes let's assume that
we have a base layer of a physics engine
but we're not quite sure how to
construct our robot in that physics
engine so we're evolving these virtual
robots in an underlying simulator so far
so good okay what's
happening as always I'm showing you a
video that's taking some snapshots over
evolutionary
time when I shot this video almost 20
years ago now I wasn't very good at
controlling the virtual camera inside
the physics engine so I want you to
mentally rotate the the virtual camera
and imagine the virtual camera is here
and pointing to the robot here virtual
cameras over here it's pointing at the
robot
here what's
happening what's the virtual robot
evolving to do trying to mimic the real
one
randoming it's trying to mimic what the
real robot did which was the real robot
just tilted 30 to the right so my
apologies if the virtual camera was here
pointing here you'd see that this green
block starts to rotate 30 to the right
everybody see that okay so over this
short snippet you're seeing the most fit
simulator in the population of evolving
simulators over about half an hour
running on a 2003 desktop computer and
you can see
that the estimation algorithm the
algorithm that's evolving these
simulators is getting more accurate it's
matching it's matching the physical
robot you'll notice that the robot is
discovering there's lots of different
ways it can put all these nine pieces
together and explain or match that real
data there isn't just one virtual body
that causes the robot to rotate 30
degrees to the right there's lots of
them what does the robot conclude at
this
point you're an infant you don't know
much about your body you've done
something your visual system hasn't
developed very well yet you feel
yourself rocked to the right you start
thinking in your head about how all your
body parts might be put together and you
can come up with lots of different
theories that explain the data Maybe I'm
put together like this maybe I'm put
together like
that what do you conclude you might be
doing this subliminally you don't know
you're doing this but what do you
conclude lots of different body plans
explain the same data set we got a
problem we need more data
because they can all be right I don't
yet know how my body's put together but
I can't be a snake I can't be a linear
arrangement of nine parts and and a
quadrip and a biped simultaneously I
can't be all these things whatever I am
I'm only one thing so I need more data
so we've gone from real to
sim now we're going to go back to
real okay so we go back to this robot
and this time I don't know why we're
having a problem with videos
here
okay we go back to sim and this time the
robot does
this now the robot is pulling some other
levers down and letting the other ones
rotate up and this time the robot tilts
10 to the left so so now the physical
robot has two pieces of data from The
Real World one and five down tilt 30
Dees to the right rotate seven down
seven down and now I tilt 10 to the
left what do you think the robot does at
this
point it's got several ideas about how
it's put together several ideas that
explained that first piece of data now
it's got two pieces P of data what does
the robot do
next do you
think does it Nar down the possibilities
from the first simulation say oh it
can't be this this or this because when
Ive like this it didn't go C go this C
absolutely it's going to narrow down
it's going to narrow down its
possibilities how is it going to narrow
down its possibilities
exactly can we be a little bit more
specific how does it
know possibly right that's an
explanation but how does it get to that
explanation how did it make the leap
that you just made just run the motor
and the motor of witch body plan
remember we have several different ones
all of them okay so we run all of them
remember we have this population of
virtual body plans we run each of them
with this new plan rotate motor 7 down
motor 7 is going to be a different
places on these different bodies so now
all those different bodies are going to
rotate in different
ways we need to recompute the fitness of
all of those those current virtual
bodies that we have how does the fitness
change for all of those virtual bodies
that we have in the population all of
them by definition explain the first
action we've just supplied all of them
with this second action rotate motor 7
down how does Fitness
change for these
bodies which which do well and which do
not do
well absolutely if in those virtual
bodies one of them actually manages to
rotate 10 degrees that one gets to
continue to enjoy High Fitness and the
fitness of all the others drops because
they all explained the first action or
they could replicate the first action in
simulation but they couldn't replicate
the repercussions of the second action
so their fitnesses drop and this one
just by chance is now more fit than
everyone else in the population
everybody see that so far if I lost
anyone okay what's the chance that among
all those bodies there was one or at
least one that happened to also describe
perfectly this second action that
actually did rotate 10 degrees to the
left
probably not very likely why should they
they own they were evolved to explain
the first action Mother Nature is a
satisficer not an Optimizer she
explained very well she came up with a
whole bunch of different body plans that
explained action one no reason why they
would explain action to so likely the
fitnesses of all of them would
drop what do we do now this seems
problematic we now have a whole bunch of
virtual bodies that have low Fitness
they're not explaining real very
well what do we
do you're a baby you know nothing about
your body you do something you update
your ideas about how you're put together
that explain that action now you've done
something else and suddenly H all the
ideas you had
what do you
do try again you could try
again but you have this new piece of
information that's unexplained so far
you could go get another
piece dangerous whether you're a baby or
a Rover sitting on an unknown
surface what do you
do you have a whole bunch of ideas about
your body that explain the first action
but not the second generate new ideas
generate new ideas we just continue the
first evolutionary algorithm keep
evolving
bodies not having much luck with my
videos this
morning which is a shame because we have
a lot of
them okay so what you're going to see in
a moment eventually is you're going to
see the first evolutionary algorithm
that's evolving these virtual bodies
just keep
going question yeah why chose to start
Evolution from
just great question why didn't we just
tell it how it's put together or vaguely
vaguely yeah how long did it take many
of you to build the quadruped in the
10th
assignment maybe not too long got to
figure out joint normals joint ranges
body
parts that's for a robot made up of
eight nine parts and eight joints The
Rovers that are up on Mars at the moment
have uh upwards of 3,000 moving
components it is not trivial even to
make an approximation so one of the
things we wanted to just try in this
experiment was how little aiori
information could you give this
algorithm for it to reconstruct a
simulation of the robot you're right in
this simple case we probably could have
just given it to it we wanted to see how
well it could
do okay so at this point in the
experiment we started in real we bounced
back to sim back to real for a second
time we're now back at sim a second time
so what happens in the resilient
machines project is we go back and forth
real Sim Sim to real real to sim to real
what you're watching in this actual
video is not the second attempt at Sim
this is actually the eighth attempt we'd
be here all day if we went through a
whole bunch of these so you'll have to
bear with me we've jumped ahead at this
point the physical robot has carried out
eight actions and at the start of this
video the robot has a whole bunch of
different bodies it's got a whole bunch
of different bodies like these that
explain
the seven actions but don't explain the
eth one they all fail terribly on the
eth
one at the end of this video after we've
continued to run this evolutionary
algorithm that's evolving these
simulators we now have body plans that
explain all eight
actions why am I skipping ahead to the
eighth one there's something that
happened during this eth
attempt that made a big difference
what's
happening got data from
all uh good point we
um I think that's actually true now it
wasn't that it tried the first motor on
attempt one motor two on the second
attempt but just by chance on this
eighth attempt I think now it has
sufficient data from all the motors and
enough combinations so that
what
happens what does the robot discover
during this eth attempt to evolve
descriptions of itself you have four
legs two SE of absolutely so this is the
moment during this particular
evolutionary trial this experiment in
which the robot had its Eureka moment up
until this point it says there's I can
imagine lots of different ways of
putting together my nine parts that
explain all seven actions but now with
this eight eight action suddenly there
appears in the population one simulation
and you're going to see it briefly in a
moment in which the robot gets three out
of the four legs
right and that suddenly explains like
seven and a half actions it's suddenly
starting to understand everything that's
been happening 7 and a half and then a
few more mutations couple more
generations of this evolutionary
algorithm evolve that three-legged robot
into a four-legged robot and this one
suddenly starts to explain all eight
actions when we run all eight of those
controllers on that last virtual robot
that virtual robot tilts in all the ways
that the physical robot tilted during
those eight
actions absolutely so every time we're
running this evolutionary algorithm
Fitness tends to drop things get harder
and harder because each individual
virtual robot has to explain every
physical
action at this point in the experiment
we have eight pieces of data from The
Real World so we have to evaluate each
virtual robot eight
times we rotate motor one and five down
then rotate motor seven down and we see
how the virtual robot does in all of
those eight cases yeah you and the
fitness function is measuring how well
do you do at explaining or tilting the
same way the physical robot did in all
those eight
trials uh good point uh boy this is 20
years ago now we multiplied the tilts
together right so it has to do well at
all of them so he said goes up goes down
goes down so if we imagine at the
beginning when we were running Sim the
very first Time Fitness went up up up up
up because it was relatively easy for
The evolutionary algorithm to evolve
bodies that tilted 30 degrees to the
right no sweat easy Evolution Made Easy
progress we got this second piece of
data suddenly everyone in the population
could not explain this second so
everybody dropped but a little bit more
slowly This Time Fitness started to rise
again as we kept running this
evolutionary algorithm and finally we
started to get bodies that could explain
both experiences from The Real World up
down up down during this eighth trial
down down down up up four
legs okay we let this experiment
continue
here's the robot we're going to skip
ahead now this is the 16th trial this is
the physical robot performing its 16th
action and in this case it just happens
to rotate Motors in this way we take
that 16th piece from real and go back to
sim what do you think is happening at
Sim at this point at this point in Sim
we still have a population of virtual
bodies that are all good at explaining
all previous 15 actions and now it's got
a 16th one what do you think's happening
at this point are
all they're all still
good if I can play
this
apologies
this is what's happening in The
evolutionary
process The evolutionary algorithm
saying no problem you keep throwing you
keep giving me more and more information
from The Real
World and nothing is changing in The
evolutionary algorithm we have this very
highly fit body plan and it looks all of
the body plans in this population they
all look like this they're all
explaining the data 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
no drop in Fitness this particular body
plan continues to describe everything
that's coming in from the physical
robot what can the robot conclude at
this
point remember the robot has no camera
it can't see itself but what can the
robot conclude
now we do another 16 actions 32 no
change they're all every virtual robot
in the population is a radially
symmetric four-legged
roboted it's converged the robot says I
know I look like this I can't actually
see myself but I've indirectly inferred
my reality this is it this is how I'm
put together the robot now has the
physical robot now has high certainty it
knows how it's put together
great okay we haven't even started the
NASA NASA Mission yet right this is just
tuning up or evolving a simulation of
the physical robot so now we start up
the second evolutionary
algorithm which you're more familiar
with is just going to evolve populations
of neural controllers for this robot the
one that just evolved so far so good
okay I won't even bother talking much
about this uh evolutionary algorithm you
know how this goes this is what it comes
up with at the end so we finished the
first evolutionary algorithm we're now
finishing the second evolutionary
algorithm second evolutionary algorithm
says this this neural controller if you
drop it into the physical robot I
predict this is what's going to happen
you're going to complete the mission
you're going to successfully walk from
the left side of the table to the right
side of the table I see some of you
smiling which is a good sign you're all
becoming good skeptical roboticists you
respect the Gap mind the
gap okay what
happens it's not perfect there's
definite
differences it works okay we crossed the
Gap so the reason we're talking about
this project is because of this part
right this is a way to cross the reality
Gap by tuning the Sim automatically
tuning the simulators to be closer to
reality any questions at this
point okay however we're being paid by
NASA so we can't finish here we need to
continue this experiment on to what NASA
actually carries cares about which is
methods of Last
Resort
so we sent the grad student who worked
on this project Victor we sent him in
with a screwdriver and he mechanically
separated the robot's uh front lower leg
did not remove the wiring so you're
inside the Box you still have your eight
levers from your perspective nothing has
changed from time to time this
particular robot carries out some of
those 16 actions that it performed
during the first evolutionary algorithm
when this robot rotated motor 7 down
before it rotated 10 to the left but
now when the robot repeats that action
it rotates motor 7 down it
rotates 5 degrees to the left it
performs the same action but gets a
different sensory result what does the
robot do at this
point like learn how to walk or
something it's got to relearn how to
walk but why does it bother relearning
how to walk it already knows how to walk
this its body plan has
changed maybe maybe it's lost apart
maybe it's stuck its foot into mud or
regolith or you know who knows what's
out there maybe it's walked onto the
surface of a crater and its environment
has changed this robot has no camera it
can't tell so something has changed
either I've changed or the world has
changed in this first experiment we
cheated we told the robot we said your
environment never changes you're always
walking across an acrylic sheet put on a
workbench so it knows that its
environment hasn't changed so it's body
must have changed so it goes back to the
first evolutionary
algorithm the one in which it thinks
that it's a four-legged robot the first
evolutionary algorithm that's
evolving virtual robots and it of those
16 actions it takes the action in which
motor 7 rotated down and replaces it
with this new data it says now when I
rotate motor 7 down I got this result so
it's got 15 of the original pieces of
data and the 16th is one new piece of
data what do you think happens to the
fitness of all the virtual
quadrupeds at this
point they all drop what do we do just
start running the first evolutionary
algorithm
again you'll see when this video repeats
in a moment the robot starts with the
quadrupedal description there and that
quadrupedal description is the one that
suffer to drop in Fitness so it's
rapidly bred out of the population and
replaced with some of
these I see some of you squinting in
confusion what's going on
here I haven't given you many details
about this evolutionary algorithm I just
told you that it's evolving populations
of virtual robots we've got a whole
bunch of different mutation operators in
here some of which add and remove Parts
they disconnect parts and connect them
together in new ways and some of the
mutation operators shrink or enlarge
some of the parts why the heck would we
include those kinds of mutation
operators you'll notice that the robot
actually briefly entertains the
notion that it's got a shrunken front
leg which actually gets kind of high
Fitness that's why it showed up briefly
in this video every every model that you
see here is explaining 15 15 and a half
16 of the actions some of these crazy
ideas are actually doing a pretty good
job
why
I feel like you youve needed that
originally because when we only it only
didn't know like how it was it's made up
it had no like relative way to know what
parts were bigger than others so uh
that's true it doesn't actually we also
didn't tell it how big these parts are
it's also trying to estimate that I kind
of glossed over that
detail it also turns out it's helpful
when the robot loses a part at least
it's helpful temporarily and it's rapid
ly replaced with a more accurate
description actually the correct
description which is that it's now a
three and a half legged robot rather
than a four-legged
robot you crash into the surface of an
extraplanetary body or you bounce down
on the surface a little bit faster than
you should have part of one of your legs
or a wheel breaks off some of the metal
shears and your leg is slightly bent you
step in some wet material sand grit
regolith and now you start carrying a
little bit of that material on your leg
it turns out that shrinking and
increasing the size of objects although
physically impossible in the real world
at least with robots that are made out
of metal that's impossible it actually
ends up estimating or approximating a
wide range of things that can actually
happen we didn't want to put particle
physics into this physics engine that's
very comput ation Al inefficient but a
lot of The Rovers that NASA cares about
are going to move over particulate
matter sand Clays all those kinds of
things it turns out we don't need to
simulate all that the robot can come up
with a pretty good explanation of itself
even if that internal description or
model is a little crazy doesn't actually
make
sense when we published this paper in
science back in 2006 in the in next
week's issue there was a response to
this paper from a dream
psychologist said this is what we in the
dream Community have been saying all
along there's a reason why you have
crazy dreams that's your brain trying to
fit your experiences and the way you
interaction interact with the world
trying to come up with a better
description of what you are and aren't
capable of what others are and aren't
capable of and one path to get to the
right explanation or a good explanation
is often through Crazy Land through
things that can't possibly be true in
reality but they make a strange kind of
sense right I imagine you've all had
this experience you wake up in the
morning you're like wow that was such a
crazy dream but actually there were
parts of it that were metaphorical or
they kind of led me to a more literal
understanding of what happened last week
who knows right this is evolutionary
robotics but at least for the dream
psychology Community they found this
kind of interesting
it might provide an idea for the
Adaptive advantage of dreaming who knows
there you go okay all right for our back
to our back to reality actually not back
to reality yet we're still in simulation
so the robot says aha now I know that
I'm a three and a half legged robot what
do I do now what's the next step in the
experiment what do we do what does a
robot do
it's got to try and walk so it takes
that neural
controller that caused the four-legged
robot to walk takes that evolved
controller and reruns it on the three
and a half legged robot what do you
think
happens Fitness is going to drop in the
second evolutionary algorithm where
we're revolving neural controllers all
those neural controllers drop in Fitness
because they were all good at
controlling a four-legged robot they're
probably terrible at controlling a three
and a half legged robot so we run that
second evolutionary algorithm we keep it
going and this neural controller
evolves you can go back and compare
these but this neural controller causes
the three-legged robot to move in a very
different way than the four-legged robot
does
what's going
on lip it's limping all
right the mission is to move from the
left side of the table to the right side
of the table how are we
doing does it it does it right maybe
pervers L it does it by walking in a
semicircle so that when it ends it's
facing backwards although this is a
radially symmetric robot so maybe there
is no backwards maybe it's not perverse
we didn't say anything about how it
should move from left to right just that
it should move from left to right for
those of you that are evolving quadrip
heads at the moment you probably got
things as crazy if not crazier than this
okay it works what do we do we take this
evolved controller and run it
on
sorry on our physical three and a half
legged
robot and we've just rescued several
million of US taxpayer dollars from
being flushed down the drain it's able
to this robot at this point has
diagnosed what's gone
wrong it's got diagnosed what's gone
wrong it's come up with a accurate
description of itself it knows it's lost
half of its front leg and it's come up
with a way to recover without the help
of Mission Control because Mission
Control also has no idea what's going on
okay we've got uh one minute left so let
me just set the stage for next time what
we just talked about was bouncing back
and forth between the estimation
algorithm which is trying to estimate
the state or the makeup of the robot's
body and the exploitation algorithm
which is trying to exploit the best
evolved simulator so far to get the
robot to do whatever it is we want it to
do how did the robot actually choose
these 16 actions I didn't actually tell
you how it came up with these 16 things
to try I will tell you it didn't come up
with random ideas it used a third
evolutionary algorithm to evolve these
16 actions we'll talk about that next
time you have a quiz due tonight you are
now working on your first weekly report
see you all on
Thursday